title: trimtrain - unix utilities that should exist
slug: trimtrain
category: update
date: 2024-03-01
modifed: 2024-03-02

# Introducing trimtrain: An Efficient Tool for Space Normalization

`trimtrain` allows you to clean and normalize a dataset so that all data is separated by single spaces for further text processing.

### Key Features

- **Simplicity**: `trimtrain` is designed with simplicity in mind. It does one thing and does it well - normalizing data columns.
- **Flexibility**: Whether you're working with text files that have spaces or tabs as separators, `trimtrain` seamlessly handles both, making your data uniformly spaced.   The output separator is configurable for different workflows.
- **Efficiency**: Optimized for performance, `trimtrain` can process large files quickly, making it a highly useful tool in your data processing toolkit.

### Getting Started with trimtrain

Getting `trimtrain` up and running is straightforward. The utility is written in C++ and can be compiled and installed on any system with a few simple commands. Here's how to get started:

1. **Clone the repository**: First, clone the `trimtrain` repository from GitHub:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/jac18281828/trimtrain.git
cd trimtrain
```

2. **Build `trimtrain`**: Compile the source code using the `make` command:

```sh
mkdir -p build
cmake -H. -Bbuild -DPROJECT_NAME=trimtrain -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RELEASE -DCMAKE_VERBOSE_MAKEFILE=on -Wno-dev "-GUnix Makefiles"
make -j
```

3. **Install**: Finally, install `trimtrain` into your system's standard executable path:

```sh
sudo make install
```

Once installed, using `trimtrain` is as simple as piping input into it. For more detailed usage instructions, refer to the [README](https://github.com/jac18281828/trimtrain) file in the GitHub repository.

### Contributing to trimtrain

`trimtrain` is open-source and community-driven. Contributions are not only welcome but also encouraged. Whether you're interested in fixing bugs, suggesting enhancements, or adding new features, your input is valuable. 

### Conclusion

`trimtrain` is a simple yet powerful utility for normalizing space separated data.
